---
layout: post
title: Broadcasting sound over VPN.
categories: [blog, linux]
ccmd: "cat broadcasting"
---

Having the enormous ammount of music on my hard drive, I started to experience
difficulties to bring it whereever I want, especially when the place I'm heading
is far from home and I have no other points to bring my laptop with me. Combined
with my natural urge to overcomplicate things, this became a reason to create
a tiny homebrew broadcasting service in VPN. Surprisingly, it worked pretty
well, so I decided to share my experience with you. 

Tools and materials:

* Linux laptop with a large music library, which will be turned into an Internet
Radio server.
* VPS with _tun_ and _iptables_ enabled to be used as a VPN server.
* Some other device to play the music. I use an Android smartphone.

## Step 1: VPN

First of all, we need to setup Virtual Private Network. This can easilly
be achieved with [this script](https://github.com/Angristan/OpenVPN-Install).
Just follow the instructions in README.md to get the server wired. When you're
done with this, open your OpenVPN config file placed in _/etc/openvpn/server.conf_
and comment the line `push "redirect-gateway def1 bypass-dhcp"`. This lets you
access the Internet without forwarding through the server but still be able to
use services located inside the personal network. Run the script twice more to
generate configuration files for your clients (a broadcasting server and a
player) and check the accessibility. You may also need to open port _1194_ on
your VPS.

To connect a Linux machine to VPN use `openvpn --config something.ovpn`, for an
Android client I recomment [this app](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=de.blinkt.openvpn&hl=en_US).

## Step 2: Broadcasting service

I use `icecast` as a broadcasting service. It's free and quite easy to install
when you're following [the official docs](http://www.icecast.org/docs/icecast-2.4.1/basic-setup.html).
The same can be said about `darkice` configuration process.
